#+title: Digital Water Utility Competencies: R for Water Professionals
#+date: 2019-06-17 10:00:00
#+lastmod: 2020-07-18
#+categories[]: The-Devil-is-in-the-Data
#+tags[]: Hydroinformatics R-Language
#+draft: true

The digital water utility is a fashionable catchphrase in the water
industry. Managing reliable water services requires not only a
sufficient volume of water but also significant amounts of data. Water
professionals continuously measure the flow and quality of the water and
how customers perceive their service. Water professionals analyse this
data to monitor processes and to decide the appropriate course of
action. [[https://leanpub.com/c/R4H2O][R for Water professionals]] is an
online workshop to introduce water engineers, biologists, economists,
and so on with the principles of using code to create value from data.
The content of this course is also freely available on
[[https://github.com/pprevos/r4h2o][GitHub]], including the data and
scripts used in the case studies.

** Digital Water Utility Competencies
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: digital-water-utility-competencies
   :END:

One of the three main competencies of a data scientist is /domain
knowledge/. To make sense of what data scientists analyse, they need to
have subject-matter expertise. A data scientist without this knowledge
can easily make mistakes because they view their problem as abstract,
instead of being part of reality.

#+CAPTION: Data science competencies (Based on Conway, 2009).
[[/images/blogs.dir/9/files/sites/9/2019/05/figure03_Conway.png]]

Data scientists with competencies in all three areas are rare. Some
people refer to these people as data data science
[[https://medium.com/@NileshMGupta/becoming-a-data-science-unicorn-879723111d42][unicorns]]
or
[[https://thefullstackdatascientist.com/blog/what-is-a-full-stack-data-scientist/][full-stack]]
data scientists. Most people enter data science from the domains of
computing or mathematics. For a mathematician or a computer scientist to
become a domain expert, in this case, a water professional takes several
years of training and experience. So why not reverse this equation and
train existing subject-matter experts to learn about writing data
science code?

/R for Water Professionals/ teaches the basics of using the R language
to solve water management problems. I developed this course because I
want to help fellow water professionals to
[[https://lucidmanager.org/spreadsheets-for-data-science/][ditch the
spreadsheet]] and write code to analyse data. The objective of this
course is to give participants a starting point for further self-study.
To become a digital water utility, water professionals need to develop
competencies in data science to fully embrace the benefits of
digitisation.

** Case Study approach
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: case-study-approach
   :END:

This workshop uses a case study approach to introduce participants to
coding in the R language. Rather than a systematic theoretical approach
to teach coding, the case studies form a starting point to introduce
various concepts of writing data science code. Each case study starts
with a problem statement that participants resolve with R code. The case
studies relate to water quality data, customer perception and water
consumption.

Firstly, the workshop introduces the principles of
[[https://leanpub.com/strategic_data_science][strategic data science]],
which is an extract from my book on that topic. This session presents a
framework for best practice in data science:

- /Useful/: Actionable intelligence
- /Sound/: Valid, reliable and reproducible
- /Aesthetic/: Interpretable and explainable

*** Case Study 1
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: case-study-1
    :END:

The first case study introduces the participant to the basics of using R
and Studio by assessing a set of lab results from a water supply network
against local regulations. Above all, his case study demonstrates the
importance of sound data science by reviewing the various ways
[[https://lucidmanager.org/percentile-calculations/][percentiles]] can
be calculated.

#+CAPTION: Analysing turbidity data in various systems.
[[/images/blogs.dir/9/files/sites/9/2019/05/turbidity-1024x434.png]]

*** Case Study 2
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: case-study-2
    :END:

The digital water utility is not only about technology. All technology
is in service of providing a convenient service to consumers. second
case study looks at the results of a customer survey about their
[[https://lucidmanager.org/invisible-water-utility/][perception of water
services]]. This study delves into cleaning data and exploration through
visualising the data. An
[[https://lucidmanager.org/measuring-consumer-involvement/][earlier
article]] on this website showed how to use factor analysis for this
data.

#+CAPTION: Best practice in data visualisation is to maximise the
data-to-pixel ratio.
[[/images/blogs.dir/9/files/sites/9/2019/06/visualisation-1024x569.png]]

*** Case Study 3
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: case-study-3
    :END:

The last case study uses
[[https://lucidmanager.org/simulating-water-consumption/][simulated
smart meter data]] to introduces the basics of literate programming to
develop a report. The assignment for this case study is to report on
water consumption and find properties with a leak.

#+CAPTION: Diurnal curve from smart water meters.
[[/images/blogs.dir/9/files/sites/9/2019/05/diurnal_curve-1024x659.png]]

** R for Water Professionals: Developing Digital Water Utility
Competencies
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: r-for-water-professionals-developing-digital-water-utility-competencies
   :END:

#+CAPTION: *Click the banner to find out more*
[[/images/blogs.dir/9/files/sites/9/2019/11/9-1024x512.png]]

** Hydroinformatics: Musings about Water Utility Data Science in R
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: hydroinformatics-musings-about-water-utility-data-science-in-r
   :END:
