#+title: Discourse Network Analysis: Undertaking Literature Reviews in R
#+date: 2018-11-15 11:00:00
#+lastmod: 2020-07-18
#+categories[]: The-Devil-is-in-the-Data
#+tags[]: Digital-Humanities R-Language
#+draft: true

Literature reviews are the cornerstone of science. Keeping abreast of
developments within any given field of enquiry has become increasingly
difficult given the enormous amounts of new research. Databases and
search technology have made finding relevant literature easy but,
keeping a coherent overview of the discourse within a field of enquiry
is an ever more encompassing task.

Scholars have proposed many approaches to analysing literature, which
can be placed along a continuum from traditional narrative methods to
systematic analytic syntheses of text using machine learning.
Traditional reviews are biased because they rely entirely on the
interpretation of the researcher. Analytical approaches follow a process
that is more like scientific experimentation. These systematic methods
are reproducible in the way literature is searched and collated but
still rely on subjective interpretation.

Machine learning provides new methods to analyse large swaths of text.
Although these methods sound exciting, these methods are incapable of
providing insight. Machine learning cannot interpret a text; it can only
summarise and structure a corpus. Machine learning still requires human
interpretation to make sense of the information.

This article introduces a mixed-method technique for reviewing
literature, combining qualitative and quantitative methods. I used this
method to analyse literature published by the International Water
Association as part of my dissertation into
[[https://lucidmanager.org/invisible-water-utility/][water utility
marketing]]. You can read the code below, or download it from
[[https://github.com/pprevos/qds/tree/master/LiteratureReview][GitHub]].
Detailed infromation about the methodology is available through
[[https://doi.org/10.26181/5bd90ca36da85][FigShare]].

** A literature review with RQDA
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: a-literature-review-with-rqda
   :END:

The purpose of this review was to ascertain the relevance of marketing
theory to the discourse of literature in water management. This analysis
uses a sample of 244 journal abstracts, each of which was coded with the
[[http://rqda.r-forge.r-project.org/][RQDA]] library. This library
provides functionality for
[[https://lucidmanager.org/qualitative-data-science/][qualitative data
analysis]]. RQDA provides a graphical user interface to mark sections of
text and assign them to a code, as shown below.

#+CAPTION: Marking topics in an abstract with RQDA.
[[/images/blogs.dir/4/files/sites/4/2018/11/rqda_abstract.png]]

You can load a corpus of text into RQDA and mark each of the texts with
a series of codes. The texts and the codes are stored in an SQLite
database, which can be easily queried for further analysis.

{{< youtube "TodbCCbV6Wc" >}}

I used a marketing dictionary to assess the abstracts from journals
published by the International Water Association from the perspective of
marketing. This phase resulted in a database with 244 abstracts and
their associated coding.

** Discourse Network Analysis
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: discourse-network-analysis
   :END:

Once all abstracts are coded, we can start analysing the internal
structure of the IWA literature. First, let's have a look at the
occurrence of the topics identified for the corpus of abstracts.

The first lines in this snippet call the tidyverse and RQDA libraries
and open the abstracts database. The =getCodingTable= function provides
a data frame with each of the marked topics and their location.Â  This
function allows us to visualise the occurrence of the topics in the
literature.

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
  library(tidyverse)
  library(RQDA)
  ## Open project
  openProject("IWA_Abstracts.rqda", updateGUI = TRUE)

  ## Visualise codes
  getCodingTable() %>%
      group_by(codename) %>%
      count() %>%
      arrange(n) %>%
      ungroup() %>%
      mutate(codename = factor(codename, levels = codename)) %>%
      ggplot(aes(codename, n)) +
          geom_col() +
          coord_flip() +
          xlab("Code name") + ylab("Occurence")
#+END_EXAMPLE

#+CAPTION: Frequencies of topics in IWA literature.
[[/images/blogs.dir/4/files/sites/4/2018/11/code_frequencies.png]]

This bar chart tells us that the literature is preoccupied with asset
management and the quality of the product (water) or the service
(customer perception). This insight is interesting, but not very
enlightening information. We can use discourse network analysis to find
a deeper structure in the literature.

** Discourse Network Analysis
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: discourse-network-analysis-1
   :END:

We can view each abstract with two or more topics as a network where
each topic is connected. The example below shows four abstracts with two
or more codes and their internal networks.

#+CAPTION: Examples of complete networks for four abstracts.
[[/images/blogs.dir/4/files/sites/4/2018/11/complete_graphs.png]]

The union of these four networks forms a more extensive network that
allows us to analyse the structure of the corpus of literature, shown
below.

#+CAPTION: Union of networks and community detection.
[[/images/blogs.dir/4/files/sites/4/2018/11/mix_example.communities.png]]

We can create a network of topics with the
[[http://igraph.org/r/][igraph package]]. The first step is to create a
[[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Document-term_matrix][Document-Term-Matrix]].
This matrix counts how often a topic occurs within each abstract. From
this matrix, we can create a graph by transforming it into an
[[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adjacency_matrix][Adjacency Matrix]].
This matrix describes the graph which can be visualised and analysed.
For more detailed information about this method, refer to
[[http://hdl.handle.net/1959.9/561679][my dissertation]].

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
  library(igraph)
  library(reshape2)
  dtm <- getCodingTable()[,c(5, 4)] %>%
      mutate(freq = 1) %>%
      acast(filename ~ codename, sum)
  adj <- crossprod(dtm)
  g <- graph.adjacency(adj, weighted = T, mode = "undirected")
  g <- simplify(g)
  ## Network Graphs
  V(g)$name <- gsub(" ", "\n", V(g)$name)
  par(mar = rep(0, 4))
  plot(g,
       layout = layout.fruchterman.reingold,
       vertex.label.cex = 1,
       vertex.size = degree(g),
       vertex.label.color = "black",
       vertex.frame.color = "white",
       vertex.color = "Dodgerblue",
       edge.width = E(g)$weight * 1,
       edge.color = "darkgray"
  )
#+END_EXAMPLE

#+CAPTION: The network of topics in IWA literature.
[[/images/blogs.dir/4/files/sites/4/2018/11/iwa_network.png]]

In this graph, each node is a topic in the literature, and each edge
implies that a topic is used in the same abstract. This graph uses the
Fruchterman-Reingold algorithm to position each of the nodes, with the
most connected topic in the centre.

The last step is to identify the structure of this graph using community
detection. A community is a group of nodes that are more connected with
each other than with nodes outside the community.

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
  set.seed(123)
  comms <- spinglass.community(g, spins = 100)
  par(mar = rep(0, 4))
  plot(comms, g,
       layout = layout.fruchterman.reingold,
       vertex.label.cex = .7,
       vertex.size = degree(g),
       vertex.label.color = "black",
       vertex.frame.color = NA,
       edge.color = "black",
       vertex.label.family = "sanserif",
       mark.border = NA
  )
#+END_EXAMPLE

#+CAPTION: Community detection in IWA literature.
[[/images/blogs.dir/4/files/sites/4/2018/11/iwa_communities.png]]

We have now succeeded to convert a corpus of 244 journal abstracts to a
parsimonious overview of four communities of topics. This analysis
resulted in greater insight into how marketing theory applies to water
management, which was used to structure a book about
[[https://www.iwapublishing.com/books/9781780408668/customer-experience-management-water-utilities-marketing-urban-water-supply][water
utility marketing]].

#+CAPTION: *LEARN MORE ABOUT R FOR WATER PROFESSIONALS HERE!*
[[/images/blogs.dir/9/files/sites/9/2019/11/9-1024x512.png]]
