#+title: Factor Analysis in R with the Psych Package: Measuring Consumer Involvement
#+date: 2019-01-19 11:00:00
#+lastmod: 2020-07-18
#+categories[]: The-Devil-is-in-the-Data
#+tags[]: Hydroinformatics Marketing R-Language
#+draft: true

The first step for anyone who wants to promote or sell something is to
understand the psychology of potential customers. Getting into the minds
of consumers is often problematic because measuring psychological traits
is a complex task. Consumer involvement is a measure of the attitude
people have towards a product or service. This article introduces the
concept of consumer involvement. An example using data from tap water
consumers illustrates the theory. This article analyses the data
collected from these consumers with factor analysis in R, using the
[[https://personality-project.org/r/][psych package]].

The most common method to measure psychological traits is to ask people
a battery of questions. Analysing this data is complicated because it is
difficult to determine how the survey responses relate to the software
of the mind. While the answers given by survey respondents are the
directly measured variables, we like to know the hidden (latent) states
in their mind. Factor Analysis is a technique identifies latent
variables within a responses set of data, such as a customer survey.

The basic principle of measuring consumer attitudes is that their state
of mind causes them to respond in a certain way. Factor analysis
reverses this causality by analysing patterns in the responses that are
indicative of the consumer's state of mind. Using a computing analogy,
factor analysis is a technique to reverse-engineer the source code by
analysing the input and output.

** What is Consumer Involvement?
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: what-is-consumer-involvement
   :END:

Involvement is a marketing metric that describes the relevance of a
product or service in somebody's life.
[[http://www.sfu.ca/~zaichkow/research.html][Judy Zaichkowsky]] defines
consumer involvement formally as “a person's perceived relevance of the
object based on inherent needs, values, and interests”. People who own a
car will most likely be highly involved with purchasing and driving the
vehicle due to the money involved and the social role it plays in
[[https://horizonofreason.com/first-law-of-consumer-behaviour/][developing
their public self]]. Consumers will most likely have a much lower level
of involvement with the instant coffee they drink than with the clothes
they wear.

*** Managerial Relevance
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: managerial-relevance
    :END:

The level of consumer involvement depends on a complex array of factors.
These factors are related to psychology, situational factors and the
marketing mix of the service provider. The lowest level of involvement
is considered a state of inertia which occurs when people habitually
purchase a product without comparing alternatives.

From a managerial point of view, involvement is crucial because it is
causally related to willingness to pay and perceptions of quality. 
Consumers with a higher level of involvement are willing to pay more for
a service and have a more favourable perception of quality.
Understanding
[[https://lucidmanager.org/tap-water-involvement/][involvement in the
context of urban water supply]] is also important because sustainably
managing water as a common pool resource requires the active involvement
of all users.

Cult products have the highest possible level of involvement as
customers are fully devoted to a particular product or brand. Commercial
organisations use this knowledge to their advantage by maximising the
level of consumer involvement through branding and advertising. This
strategy is used effectively by the
[[https://lucidmanager.org/bottled-water-marketing/][bottled water
industry]]. Manufacturers focus on enhancing the emotional aspects of
their product rather than on improving the cognitive elements. Water
utilities tend to use a reversed strategy and emphasise the cognitive
aspects of tap water, the pipes, plants and pumps, rather than trying to
create an emotional relationship with their consumers.

** Measuring Consumer Involvement
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: measuring-consumer-involvement
   :END:

Asking consumers directly about their level of involvement would not
lead to a stable answer because each respondent will interpret the
question differently. The best way to measure psychological states or
psychometrics is to ask a series of questions that are linguistically
related to the topic of interest.

The most cited method to measure consumer involvement in the Personal
Involvement Index, developed by Judy Zaichowsky. This index is a
two-dimensional scale consisting of:

- cognitive involvement (importance, relevance, meaning, value and need)
- affective involvement (involvement, fascination, appeal, excitement
  and interest).

The survey instrument consists of ten semantic-differential items. A
Semantic Differential is a type of a rating scale designed to measure
the meaning of objects, events or concepts. The researcher translates
the concept, such as involvement, into a list of synonyms and their
associated antonyms.

In the involvement survey, participants position their views between two
extremes, such as Worthless and Valuable or Boring and Interesting. The
level of involvement is the sum of all answers, which is a number
between 10 and 70. In more detailed analysis, each item in the scale can
be of a different strength.

#+CAPTION: Personal Involvement Inventory (Zaichowsky 1994).
[[/images/blogs.dir/4/files/sites/4/2013/01/PII.jpg]]

** Exploratory Analysis
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: exploratory-analysis
   :END:

For my dissertation about
c[[https://lucidmanager.org/invisible-water-utility/][ustomer service in
water utilities]], I measured the level of involvement that consumers
have with tap water. 832 tap water consumers completed this survey in
Australia and the United States.

This data set contains other information, and the code selects only
those variable names starting with "/p/" (for Personal Involvement
Inventory). Before we analyse any data, we remove customers who provided
the same answers to all items, or did not respond to all questions.
These responses are most likely invalid, which leaves 757 rows of data.

A boxplot is a convenient way to view the responses to multiple survey
items in one visualisation. This plot immediately shows an interesting
pattern in the answers. It seems that responses to the first five items
were generally higher than those for the last five items. This result
seems to indicate a demarcation between cognitive and affective
involvement.

#+CAPTION: Responses to Personal Involvement Index by tap water
consumers.
[[/images/blogs.dir/4/files/sites/4/2019/01/involvement_explore-1024x1024.png]]

Next step in the exploratory analysis is to investigate how these
factors correlate with each other. The correlation plot below shows that
all items strongly correlate with each other. In correspondence with the
boxplots above, the first five and the last five items correlate more
strongly with each other. This plot suggests that the two dimensions of
the involvement index correlate with each other. The next section shows
how to use factor analysis in R to check the significance of these
correlation patterns.

#+CAPTION: Correlation matrix for the Personal Involvement Index
[[/images/blogs.dir/4/files/sites/4/2019/01/involvement_correlation.png]]

** Factor Analysis in R
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: factor-analysis-in-r
   :END:

Researchers often confuse Factor Analysis with Principal Component
Analysis. The outcomes of are very similar when applied to the same data
set. Both methods are similar but have a different purpose. Principal
Component Analysis is a data-reduction technique that serves to reduce
the number of variables in a problem. The specific purpose of Factor
Analysis is to uncover latent variables. The mathematical principles for
both techniques are similar, but not the same and should not be
confused.

One of the most important decisions in factor analysis is to decide how
to rotate the factors. There are two types: orthogonal or oblique. In
simple terms, orthogonal rotations seek to reduce the correlation
between dimensions and oblique rotation allow for dimensions to relate
to each other. Because of the strong correlations in the correlation
plot and the fact that both dimensions measure involvement, this
analysis uses oblique rotation. The visualisation below shows how each
of the items how, and the two dimensions relate to each other.

#+CAPTION: Factor analysis in R with Psych package.
[[/images/blogs.dir/4/files/sites/4/2019/01/involvement_factors.png]]

This simple factor analysis in R shows the basic principle of how to
analyse psychometric data. The psych package has a lot more specialised
tools to dig deeper into the information. This article has not assessed
the validity of this construct, or evaluated the reliability of the
factors. Perhaps that is for a future article.

** The R Code
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: the-r-code
   :END:

You can view the code below. Go to my
[[https://github.com/pprevos/Marketing][Github Repository]] to see the
code and the data source.

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
  ## ConsumerInvolvement.R
  library(tidyverse)
  library(psych)
  consumers <- read_csv("customers_quan.csv") %>%
      select(starts_with("p"))
  dim(consumers)

  ## Data cleansing
  sdevs <- apply(consumers, 1, sd, na.rm = TRUE)
  incomplete <- apply(consumers, 1, function(i) any(is.na(i)))
  consumers <- consumers[sdevs != 0 & !incomplete, ]
  dim(consumers)

  ## Exploratory Analysis
  consumers %>%
      rownames_to_column(var = "Subject") %>%
      gather(Item, Response, -Subject) %>%    
      ggplot(aes(Item, Response)) + geom_boxplot(fill = "#f7941d") +
      ggtitle("personal Involvement Index",
              subtitle = paste("Tap Water Consumers USA and Australia (n =",
                               nrow(consumers), ")"))
  ggsave("involvement_explore.png", dpi = 300)

  corPlot(consumers)

  ## Factor Analysis

  piiFac <- fa(consumers, nfactors = 2, rotate = "oblimin")

  fa.diagram(piiFac)
#+END_EXAMPLE

** Learn to use R Code to Solve Water Problems
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: learn-to-use-r-code-to-solve-water-problems
   :END:

#+CAPTION: *LEARN MORE ABOUT R FOR WATER PROFESSIONALS HERE!*
[[/images/blogs.dir/9/files/sites/9/2019/11/9-1024x512.png]]
