#+title: Topological Tomfoolery in R: Plotting a Möbius Strip and Klein Bottle
#+date: 2018-02-21 11:00:00
#+lastmod: 2020-07-18
#+categories[]: The-Devil-is-in-the-Data
#+tags[]: Numberphile R-Language
#+draft: true

Geometry is an entertaining branch of mathematics. Topology is,
according to [[http://www.pickover.com/][Clifford Pickover]], the "silly
putty of mathematics". This branch of maths studies the transformation
of shapes, knots and other complex geometry problems.  One of the most
famous topics in topology is the
[[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/M%C3%B6bius_strip][Möbius strip]]. This
shape has some unusual properties which have inspired many artists,
inventors, mathematicians and magicians.

You can make a Möbius strip by taking a strip of paper, giving it one
twist and glue the ends together to form a loop. If you now cut this
strip lengthwise in half, you don't end-up with two separate strips, but
with one long one.

{{< youtube "https://youtu.be/wKV0GYvR2X8" >}}

The Möbius strip can also be described with the following parametric
equations (where $latex 0 \leq u \leq 2\pi $, $latex -1 \leq v \leq 1 $
and $latex R $ is the radius of the loop):

$latex x(u,v)= \left(R+\frac{v}{2} \cos \frac{u}{2}\right)\cos u $\\
$latex y(u,v)= \left(R+\frac{v}{2} \cos\frac{u}{2}\right)\sin u $\\
$latex z(u,v)= \frac{v}{2}\sin \frac{u}{2} $

The
[[https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/638225/understanding-the-equation-of-a-m%C3%B6bius-strip][mathematics
of this set of parametric equations]] is not as complex as it looks.
$latex R $ is the radius of the ring, $latex u $ is the polar angle of
each point and $latex v $ indicates the width of the strip. The polar
angle $latex u/2 $ indicates the number of half twists. To make the ring
twist twice, change the angle to $latex u $.

For my data science day job, I have to visualise some three-dimensional
spaces, so I thought I best learn how to do this by visualising a Möbius
strip, using these three equations.

** Plotting a Möbius Strip
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: plotting-a-möbius-strip
   :END:

The
[[https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/rgl/vignettes/rgl.html][RGL
package]] provides the perfect functionality for plotting Möbius strips.
This package produces interactive three-dimensional plots that you can
zoom and rotate. This package has many options to change lighting,
colours, shininess and so on. The code to create for plotting a Möbius
strip is straightforward.

The first section defines the parameters and converts the $latex u $ and
$latex v $ sequences to a mesh (from the
[[https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/plot3D/index.html][plot3D
package]]). This function creates two matrices with every possible
combination of $latex u $ and $Latex v $ which are used to calculate the
$latex x, y, z $ points.

The last three lines define a 3D window with a white background and plot
the 3D surface in blue. You can explore the figure with your mouse by
zooming and rotating it. Parametric equations can be a bit of fun, play
with the formula to change the shape and see what happens. You can view
the code below, or find the latest version on
[[https://github.com/pprevos/r.prevos.net/blob/master/Miscellaneous/Mathematics/moebius.R][GitHub]].

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
  library(rgl)
  library(plot3D)

  ## Define Parameters
  R <- 1 # Radius
  n <- 1 # Number of twists
  u <- seq(0, 2 * pi, length.out = 100)
  v <- seq(-1, 1, length.out = 100)
  m <- mesh(u, v)
  u <- m$x
  v <- m$y

  ## Möbius Strip parametric equations
  x <- (R * 2 + v/2 * cos(n * u /2)) * cos(u)
  y <- (R + v/2 * cos(n * u /2)) * sin(u)
  z <- v/2 * sin(u / 2)

  ## Visualise
  bg3d(color = "white")
  surface3d(x, y, z, color= "blue")
#+END_EXAMPLE

#+CAPTION: Plotting a Möbius Strip in R with RGL
[[/images/blogs.dir/4/files/sites/4/2018/02/moebius-strip.jpg]]

We can take it to the next level by plotting a three-dimensional Möbius
strip, or a [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Klein_bottle][Klein
Bottle]]. The parametric equations for the bottle are mind boggling:

$latex x(u,v) = -\frac{2}{15} \cos u (3 \cos{v}-30 \sin{u}+90 \cos^4{u}
\sin{u} -60 \cos^6{u} \sin{u} +5 \cos{u} \cos{v} \sin{u}) $

$latex y(u,v) = -\frac{1}{15} \sin u (3 \cos{v}-3 \cos^2{u} \cos{v}-48
\cos^4{u} \cos{v} + 48 \cos^6{u} \cos{v} - 60 \sin{u}+5 \cos{u} \cos{v}
\sin{u}-5 \cos^3{u} \cos{v} \sin{u}-80 \cos^5{u} \cos{v} \sin{u}+80
\cos^7{u} \cos{v} \sin{u}) $

$latex z(u,v) = \frac{2}{15} (3+5 \cos{u} \sin{u}) \sin{v} $

Where: $latex 0 \leq u \leq \pi$ and $latex 0 \leq v \leq 2$.

The code to visualise this bottle is essentially the same, just more
complex equations.

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
  ## Klein Bottle (3D Möbius Strip)
  u <- seq(0, pi, length.out = 100)
  v <- seq(0, 2 * pi, length.out = 100)
  m <- mesh(u, v)
  u <- m$x
  v <- m$y
  x <- (-2 / 15) * cos(u) * (3 * cos(v) - 30 * sin(u) + 90 * cos(u)^4 * sin(u) - 
       60 * cos(u)^6 * sin(u) + 5 * cos(u) * cos(v) * sin(u))
  y <- (-1 / 15) * sin(u) * (3 * cos(v) - 3 * cos(u)^2 * cos(v) - 48 * cos(u)^4 * 
       cos(v) + 48 * cos(u)^6 * cos(v) - 60 * sin(u) + 5 * cos(u) * cos(v) * 
       sin(u) - 5 * cos(u)^3 * cos(v) * sin(u) - 80 * cos(u)^5 * cos(v) * sin(u) + 
       80 * cos(u)^7 * cos(v) * sin(u))
  z <- (+2 / 15) * (3 + 5 * cos(u) * sin(u)) * sin(v)

  bg3d(color = "white")
  surface3d(x, y, z, color= "green", alpha = 0.5)
#+END_EXAMPLE

#+CAPTION: Plotting a Klein bottle in R using RGL
[[/images/blogs.dir/4/files/sites/4/2018/02/klein-bottle-1024x787.jpg]]

The RGL package has some excellent facilities to
visualise three-dimensional objects, far beyond simple strips. I am
still learning and am working toward using it to visualise bathymetric
surveys of water reservoirs. Möbius strips are, however, a lot more fun.

If you are interested in visualising the oddities of mathematics, then
feel free to peruse my article about the
[[https://lucidmanager.org/sierpinski-triangle/][Sierpinsi triangle]].

** Creating Real Möbius Strips
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: creating-real-möbius-strips
   :END:

Even more fun than playing with virtual Möbius strips is to make some
paper versions and start cutting. If you like to create a Möbius strip,
you can recycle then purchase a large zipper from your local
haberdashery shop, add some hook-and-loop fasteners to the ends and
start playing. If you like to know more about the mathematics of the
topological curiosity, then I can highly recommend
[[http://amzn.to/2EeXJgI][Clifford Pickover's book on the topic]].

In the first half of the twentieth century, many magicians used the
Möbius strip as a magic trick. The great Harry Blackstone performed it
regularly in his show.

{{< youtube "26s" >}}

If you are interested in magic tricks and Möbius strips, including how
to create a zipper version, then you can read my ebook on the Afghan
bands.

[[https://magicperspectives.net/wp-content/blogs.dir/2/files/sites/2/2018/08/Afghan-Bands-3d.jpg]]
