#+title: Strategic Data Science: Creating Value With Data Big and Small
#+date: 2019-02-24 11:00:00
#+lastmod: 2020-07-18
#+categories[]: The-Devil-is-in-the-Data
#+tags[]: Data-Science-Strategy
#+draft: true

Data science is without a doubt the most popular business fad of the
past decade. The wonderful promises of machine learning blind many
managers, so they forget about deploying these new approaches
strategically. To create value from data, managers need to use a
strategic approach to data science. This article provides a framework
for data science, following my book
[[https://www.packtpub.com/big-data-and-business-intelligence/principles-strategic-data-science][Principles
of Strategic Data Science]], published by Packt.

#+CAPTION: Peter Prevos, Principles of Strategic Data Science.
[[https://i0.wp.com/lucidmanager.org/wp-content/blogs.dir/9/files/sites/9/2019/08/sds_3d.png?fit=1024%2C852&ssl=1]]

** What is Data Science?
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: what-is-data-science
   :END:

The manager to understand the importance of data was
[[https://lucidmanager.org/frederick-taylor-management-fundamentalism/][Frederick
Taylor]]. He was a pioneer in using data to manage a business. He used
data because he wanted to lower the influence of opinions and
rules-of-thumb in favour of a scientific approach to management. The
term data science emerged in the middle of the last century when
electronic computation first became a topic of study. In those days, the
discipline was literally a science of storing and manipulating data.

The current definition has drifted away from this initial academic
activity to a business activity. The current data science hype can be
traced back to an article in the 2012 edition of
[[https://hbr.org/2012/10/data-scientist-the-sexiest-job-of-the-21st-century][Harvard
Business Review]]. Davenport and Patil proclaimed data scientist to be
the sexiest job of the twenty-first century. Subsequently, in the wake
of this article, the number of data science searches in Google increased
rapidly.

Organisations have for a long time used data to improve the lives of
their customers, shareholders or society overall. Management gurus
promoted concepts such as the data-driven organisation, evidence-based
management, business intelligence and Six Sigma to help businesses
realise the benefits of their data. Data science is an evolution of
these methods enabled by the data revolution.

*** The Data Revolution
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: the-data-revolution
    :END:

Recent developments in information technology have significantly
improved what we can do with data, resulting in what we now know as data
science. Firstly, most business processes are managed electronically,
which has exponentially increased the amount of available data.
Developments in communication, such as the Internet of Things and
personal mobile devices, have significantly reduced the price of
collecting data.

Secondly, the computing capabilities on the average office worker's desk
outstrip the capabilities of the supercomputers of the past. Not only is
it cheaper to collect vast amounts of electronic data, but processing
these enormous volumes has also come within reach of the average office
worker.

Lastly, developments in applied mathematics and open source licensing
have accelerated our capabilities in analysing this data. These new
technologies allow us to discover patterns that were previously
invisible. Data science is available to anyone wanting to learn because
most tools to examine data are freely available on the internet with a
helpful community sharing knowledge on how to use them.

These three developments enabled an evolution from traditional business
analysis to data science. Subsequently, data science has become the
strategic and /systematic/ approach to analysing data to achieve
organisational objectives using electronic computing. This definition is
agnostic of the promises of machine learning and leverages the three
developments mentioned above. Data science as such is the next evolution
in business analysis that maximises the value we can extract from data.

*** Data Science Strategy Competencies
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: data-science-strategy-competencies
    :END:

The craft of data science combines three different competencies. To
illustrate this idea, data scientist Drew Conway visualised these core
competencies of data science in a
[[http://drewconway.com/zia/2013/3/26/the-data-science-venn-diagram][Venn
diagram]].

#+CAPTION: Data science competencies (Based on Conway, 2009).
[[/images/blogs.dir/9/files/sites/9/2019/05/figure03_Conway.png]]

Firstly and most importantly, data science requires /domain knowledge/.
Any analysis needs to be grounded in the reality it seeks to improve.
Subject-matter expertise is a necessary condition to make sense of an
investigation. Professional expertise in most areas uses /mathematics/
to understand and improve outcomes. New mathematical tools expand the
traditional approaches to develop a deeper understanding of the domain
under consideration. Lastly, /computer science/ is the competency that
binds the available data with mathematics. Writing computer code to
extract, transform and analyse data to create information and stimulate
knowledge is an essential skill for any data scientist.

{{< youtube "https://youtu.be/cJO8ASwk_XU" >}}

** Good Data Science
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: good-data-science
   :END:

In order to create value with data, we need to know how to create or
recognise good data science. The second chapter of the book uses three
principles originally introduced two thousand years ago by the Roman
architect and engineer Vitruvius. He wrote that buildings need to be
/useful/, /sound/ and /aesthetic/. These requirements are also ideally
suited to define best-practice in data science.

#+CAPTION: The Vitruvian triangle for data science.
[[/images/blogs.dir/9/files/sites/9/2019/02/vitrivius.png]]

{{< youtube "https://youtu.be/Gge5aZ9jZqo" >}}

*** Usefulness
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: usefulness
    :END:

For data science to be useful, it needs to contribute to the objectives
of an organisation positively. It is in this sense that data science is
an applied science and not an academic pursuit. The famous
Data-Information-Knowledge pyramid visualises the process of creating
value from data.

/Useful/ data science meaningfully improves our reality through data.
Data is a representation of either a social or physical reality. Any
data source is ever only a sample of the fullness and complexity of the
real world. Information is data imbued with context. The raw data
collected from reality needs to be summarised, visualised and analysed
so that managers understand the reality of their business. This
information increases knowledge about a business process, which is
subsequently used to improve the reality from which the data was
collected. This feedback loop visualises the essence of analysing data
in businesses. Data science is a seductive activity because it is
reasonably straightforward to create impressive visualisations with
sophisticated algorithms. If data products don't improve or enlighten
the current situation, they are in essence useless.

#+CAPTION: Reality - Data - Information - Knowledge pyramid.
[[/images/blogs.dir/9/files/sites/9/2019/02/feedback-loop-1024x551.png]]

{{< youtube "https://youtu.be/_ITXY6Daa5s" >}}

** Soundness
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: soundness
   :END:

Data science needs to be /sound/ to ensure that the outcomes are valid
and reliable. The validity and reliability of data are where the science
meets the traditional approaches to analysing data. Validity is the
extent to which the data represents the reality it describes. The
reliability of data relates to the accuracy of the measurement. These
two concepts depend on the type of data under consideration. Measuring
physical processes is less complicated than the social aspects of
society. Validity and reliability are in essence a sophisticated way of
expressing the well-known Garbage-In-Garbage-Out principle.

#+CAPTION: Reliability and validity of data and analysis.
[[/images/blogs.dir/9/files/sites/9/2019/02/soundness-1024x436.png]]

The soundness of data science also relates to the reproducibility of the
analysis to ensure that other professionals can review the outcomes.
Reproducibility prevents that the data and the process by which it was
transformed and analysed become a black-box where we have no reason to
trust the results. Data science also needs to be sound concerning the
governance of the workflow. All data sources need to be curated by
relevant subject matter experts to ensure their validity and
reliability. Data experts provide that the data is available to those
who need it.

{{< youtube "https://youtu.be/_hAXvAvx92I" >}}

*** Aesthetics
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: aesthetics
    :END:

Lastly, data science needs to be /aesthetic/ to ensure that any
visualisation or report is easy to understand by the consumer of the
analysis. This requirement is not about beautification through
infographics. Aesthetic data products minimise the risk or making wrong
decisions because the information is presented without room for
misinterpretation. Any visualisation needs to focus on telling a story
with the data. This story can be a comparison, a prediction, a trend or
whatever else is relevant to the problem.

One of the essential principles of aesthetic data science is the
data-to-pixel ratio. This principle means that we need to maximise the
ratio between all the pixels on a screen and those pixels that present
information. Good data visualisation practices austerity to ensure that
the people that consume the information understand the story that needs
to be told.

#+CAPTION: Example of low and high data-to-pixel ratio.
[[/images/blogs.dir/9/files/sites/9/2019/06/visualisation-1024x569.png]]

{{< youtube "5grTD8cGZQM" >}}

** Data Science Strategy
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: data-science-strategy
   :END:

The data science continuum is a strategic journey for organisations that
seek to maximise value from data. As an organisation moves along the
continuum, increased complexity is the payoff for increased value. This
continuum looks like hierarchy, but all phases are equally important.
The last stages cannot exist without the previous ones. Therefore,
implementing machine learning without a solid grasp of data collection
will result in useless outcomes.

#+CAPTION: Data science strategy continuum.
[[/images/blogs.dir/9/files/sites/9/2019/02/data-science-continuum-1024x706.png]]

Collecting data requires considerations on what to collect, how to
collect it and at what frequency. To collect meaningful data requires a
good understanding of the relationship between reality and data. There
is no such thing as raw data as all information relies on assumptions
and practical limitations.

*** Type of Value from Data
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: type-of-value-from-data
    :END:

- Describing the data is the first step in extracting value.
- Descriptive statistics are the core of most business reporting and are
  an essential first step in analysing the data.
- Diagnostics or analysis is the core activity of most professions. Each
  subject area uses specialised methods to create new information from
  data.
- Predictive analysis seems to be the holy grail for many managers. A
  prediction is not a perfect description of the future but it provides
  the distribution of possible futures. Managers can use this
  information to change the present to construct their desired future.
- Prescriptive analysis uses the knowledge created in the previous
  phases to automatically run a business process and even decide on
  future courses of action.

Any organisation starting with data science should follow the five
phases in this process and not jump ahead to try to bypass the seemingly
less valuable stages.

{{< youtube "7BR3_No2qm8" >}}

** The Data-Driven Organisation
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: the-data-driven-organisation
   :END:

Implementing a data science strategy is more than a matter of
establishing a specialised team and solve complex problems. Creating a
data-driven organisation that maximises the value of data requires a
whole-of-business approach that involves people with the right attitude
and skills, appropriate systems and robust processes.

A data science team combines the three competencies described in the
Conway Venn diagram. People that have skills in all three of these areas
are rare, and the industry calls them unicorns. There is no need for
recruiters to start hunting unicorns because these three areas of
expertise can also exist within a team. Possibly more important than the
technical skills are the social skills of a data scientist. Not only
need they create useful, sound and aesthetic data science, they also
need to convince the consumers of their work of its value.

*** Data Literacy
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: data-literacy
    :END:

One of the problems of creating value with data is ensuring that the
results are implemented in the organisation. A starting point to achieve
this is to ensure that the users of data products have a relevant level
of data literacy. Developing data literacy among consumers of data
science is probably one of the greatest challenges. The required level
of data literacy depends on the type of position and the role of the
data consumer within the organisation.

Data scientists use an extensive range of tools and are often
opportunistic in their choice of software.
[[https://lucidmanager.org/spreadsheets-for-data-science/][Spreadsheets]]
are not very suitable to create good data science. Data science requires
coding skills and the Python and R languages are powerful tools to solve
complex problems. After the data specialists have developed the best way
to analyse data, they need to communicate these to their customers. Many
specific products exist to communicate data to users with interactive
dashboards and many other dynamic systems.

The final part of this book on data science strategy delves into the
ethics of data science. From the fact that something can be done, we
certainly cannot conclude that it should be done. Just like any other
profession that impacts humans, data scientists need ethical guidelines
to ensure that their activities cause no harm. The book provides some
basic guidelines that can assist data scientists to assess the ethical
merits of their projects.

** Summary
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: summary
   :END:

In summary, data science is about more than using the latest algorithms
to analyse data. Good data science has to be useful in that it
positively influences the objectives of the organisation. Furthermore,
good data science has to be sound through a methodical approach.

[[/images/blogs.dir/9/files/sites/9/2019/06/golden-rule-data-science-ethics-1024x512.jpg]]
