#+title: Tap Water Sentiment Analysis using Tidytext
#+date: 2018-03-28 11:00:00
#+lastmod: 2020-07-18
#+categories[]: The-Devil-is-in-the-Data
#+tags[]: Digital-Humanities Hydroinformatics R-Language
#+draft: true

In developed countries, tap water is safe to drink and available for a
meagre price. Despite the fact that high-quality drinking water is
almost freely available, the consumption of bottled water is increasing
every year. Bottled water companies use sophisticated marketing
strategies, while water utilities are mostly passive providers of public
service. Australian marketing expert Russell Howcroft even called water
utilities "lazy marketers". Can we use sentiment analysis to find out
more about how people feel about tap water. What can we learn about the
reasons behind this loss in trust in the municipal water supply?

{{< youtube "Cg9YH4bm2Sk" >}}

Gruen Transfer (2009).

This tap water sentiment analysis estimates the attitudes people have
towards tap water by analysing tweets. This article explains how to
examine tweets about tap water using the R language and the
[[https://www.tidytextmining.com/sentiment.html][Tidytext package]]. The
most recent version of the code and the raw data set can be viewed on my
[[https://github.com/pprevos/hydroinformatics/tree/master/Customers][GitHub
page]].

** Sentiment Analysis
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: sentiment-analysis
   :END:

Sentiment provides an indication of the perception a group of people has
about a certain topic. Traditionally, assessing the sentiment of a group
of people requires surveys or interviews. These methods are problematic
because it creates an artificial environment where the respondent often
answers to meet the perceived expectations of the survey, or customers
exaggerate to get their point across. Using sentiment analysis of
ego-documents written by consumers can overcome these problems.
Ego-documents, i.e. forms of personal writing, are a more direct way to
find out what consumers think, but they are not easy to obtain and
analyse.

With the advent of social media, access to ego documents has become much
simpler and many tools exist to collect and interpret this data. Using
ego-documents brings you closer to the consumer than can be possible
with surveys or focus groups. One medium gaining popularity with market
researchers is [[http://twitter.com/][Twitter]].

** Tap Water Sentiment Analysis
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: tap-water-sentiment-analysis
   :END:

Each tweet that contains the words "tap water" contains a message about
the attitude the author has towards that topic. Each text expresses a
sentiment about the topic it describes.
[[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sentiment_analysis][Sentiment analysis]]
is a data science technique that extracts subjective information from a
text. The basic method compares a string of words with a set of words
with calibrated sentiments. These calibrated sets are created by asking
many people how they feel about a certain word. For example, the word
"stink" expresses a negative sentiment, while the word "nice" would be a
positive sentiment.

This tap water sentiment analysis consists of three steps. The first
step extracts 1000 tweets that contain the words "tap water" from
Twitter. The second step cleans the data, and the third step undertakes
the analysis visualises the results.

The [[https://sites.google.com/view/watercoinzerocom/home][Water Data
Aggregator]] is a commercial application of sentiment analysis for tap
water. This website sells the regional social credit score to interested
parties.

** Extracting tweets using the TwitteR package
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: extracting-tweets-using-the-twitter-package
   :END:

The
[[https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/twitteR/index.html][TwitteR
package]] by Geoff Gentry makes it very easy to retrieve tweets using
search criteria. You will need to create an API on Twitter to receive
the keys and tokens. In the code below, the actual values have been
removed. Follow the instructions in
[[https://www.r-bloggers.com/setting-up-the-twitter-r-package-for-text-analytics/][this
article]] to obtain these codes for yourself. This code snippet calls a
private file to load the API codes, extracts the tweets and creates a
data frame with a tweet id number and its text.

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
  library(tidyverse)
  library(tidytext)
  library(twitteR)

  source("twitteR_API.R")
  setup_twitter_oauth(api_key, api_secret, token, token_secret)

  tapwater_tweets <- searchTwitter("tap water", n = 1000, lang = "en") %>%
    twListToDF() %>%
    select(id, text)
  tapwater_tweets <- subset(tapwater_tweets, !duplicated(tapwater_tweets$text))
  tapwater_tweets$text <- gsub("’", "'", tapwater_tweets$text)

  write_csv(tapwater_tweets, "Hydroinformatics/tapwater_tweets.csv")
#+END_EXAMPLE

When I first extracted these tweets, a tweet by CNN about
[[https://edition.cnn.com/2018/03/30/health/kentucky-water-crisis/index.html][tap
water in Kentucky that smells like diesel]] was retweeted many times, so
I removed all duplicate tweets from the set. Unfortunately, this left
less than 300 original tweets in the corpus.

https://twitter.com/CNN/status/979946657101045760

** Sentiment analysis with Tidytext
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: sentiment-analysis-with-tidytext
   :END:

Text analysis can be a powerful tool to help to analyse large amounts of
text. The R language has an extensive range of packages to help you
undertake such a task. The [[https://www.tidytextmining.com/][Tidytext]]
package extends the [[http://vita.had.co.nz/papers/tidy-data.html][Tidy
Data]] logic promoted by Hadley Wickham and his Tidyverse software
collection.

*** Data Cleaning
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: data-cleaning
    :END:

The first step in cleaning the data is to create unigrams, which
involves splitting the tweets into individual words that can be
analysed. The first step is to look at which words are most commonly
used in the tap water tweets and visualise the result. The most common
words related to drinking the water and to bottled water, which makes
sense. Also the recent issues in Kentucky feature in this list.

#+CAPTION: Most common words in tweets about tap water.
[[/images/blogs.dir/4/files/sites/4/2018/04/tapwater_words.png]]

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
  tidy_tweets <- tapwater_tweets %>%
    unnest_tokens(word, text)

  data(stop_words)
  tidy_tweets <- tidy_tweets %>%
    anti_join(stop_words) %>%
      filter(!word %in% c("tap", "water", "rt", "https", "t.co", "gt", "amp",
                          as.character(0:9)))

  tidy_tweets %>%
    count(word, sort = TRUE) %>%
    filter(n > 5) %>%
    mutate(word = reorder(word, n)) %>%
    ggplot(aes(word, n)) + geom_col(fill = "dodgerblue4") +
      xlab(NULL) + coord_flip() +
      ggtitle("Most common words in tap water tweets")
#+END_EXAMPLE

*** Sentiment Analysis
    :PROPERTIES:
    :CUSTOM_ID: sentiment-analysis-1
    :END:

The Tidytext package contains three lexicons of thousands of single
English words (unigrams) that were manually assessed for their
sentiment. The principle of the sentiment analysis is to compare the
words in the text with the words in the lexicon and analyse the results.
For example, the statement: "This tap water tastes horrible" has a
sentiment score of -3 in the AFFIN system
by [[http://www2.imm.dtu.dk/pubdb/views/publication_details.php?id=6010][Finn
Årup Nielsen]] due to the word "horrible". In this analysis, I have used
the "bing" method published by
[[https://www.cs.uic.edu/~liub/FBS/sentiment-analysis.html][Liu et al.
in 2005]]. This method simply assigns a word to either positive,
negative or neutral sentiment.

This method is certainly not fool proof as words with the same spelling
can mean different things. For example, the phrase: "This tap water
contains too much lead" will be assess as a positive sentiment because
the verb lead is seen as positive. The noun lead has no sentiment as it
depends on context.

The other problem with sentiment analysis is that we tend to only see
negative commentary. Very few people ever contact a water utility about
the great morning shower or wonderful glass of water. Tap water resides
in the background of everyday life and people don't have any opinion
about it unless it is not available or does not meet their aesthetic
expectations.

This tap water sentiment analysis shows that two-thirds of the words
that express a sentiment were negative. The most common negative words
were "smells" and "scared". This analysis is not a positive result for
water utilities. Unfortunately, most tweets were not spatially located
so I couldn't determine the origin of the sentiment.

#+CAPTION: Tap water sentiment analysis.
[[/images/blogs.dir/4/files/sites/4/2018/04/tapwater_sentiment.png]]

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
  sentiment_bing <- tidy_tweets %>%
    inner_join(get_sentiments("bing"))
  sentiment_bing %>%
    summarise(Negative = sum(sentiment == "negative"), 
              positive = sum(sentiment == "positive"))
  sentiment_bing %>%
    group_by(sentiment) %>%
    count(word, sort = TRUE) %>%
    filter(n >= 2) %>%
    ggplot(aes(word, n, fill = sentiment)) + geom_col(show.legend = FALSE) + 
      coord_flip() + facet_wrap(~sentiment, scales = "free_y") + 
      ggtitle("Contribution to sentiment") + xlab(NULL) + ylab(NULL)
#+END_EXAMPLE

** Using Tap Water Sentiment Analysis
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: using-tap-water-sentiment-analysis
   :END:

Sentiment analysis is an interesting exploration technique, but it is
not an absolute truth. This method is not able to detect sarcasm or
irony, and words don't always have the same meaning as described in the
dictionary. For example, the algorithm interprets the word "lead" as
positive sentiment in its function as a verb. In water, however, the
chemical lead is never a positive sentiment. Interpreting tweets as bags
of words is interesting, but can lead to misunderstanding of the
context.

The important message for water utilities is that they need to start
taking the aesthetic properties of tap water as serious as the health
parameters. A lack of trust will drive consumers to bottled water, or
less healthy alternatives such as soft drinks are alternative water
sources.

If you like to know more about customer perceptions of tap water, then
read my book /Customer Experience Management for Water Utilities/ by
[[https://www.iwapublishing.com/books/9781780408668/customer-experience-management-water-utilities-marketing-urban-water-supply][IWA
Publishing]].

#+CAPTION: *LEARN MORE ABOUT R FOR WATER PROFESSIONALS HERE!*
[[/images/blogs.dir/9/files/sites/9/2019/11/9-1024x512.png]]
