#+title: Trumpworld Analysis: Ownership Relations in his Business Network
#+date: 2017-01-23 11:00:00
#+lastmod: 2020-07-18
#+categories[]: The-Devil-is-in-the-Data
#+tags[]: Network-Analysis R-Language
#+draft: true

You do not need a machine learning algorithm to predict that the
presidency of Donald Trump will be controversial. Judging by his pointed
language in the campaign, we can rest assured that Trump will break many
conventions of world politics. One of the most discussed aspects of his
reign is the massive potential for conflicts of interest. Trump's
complex business empire is entangled with national and international
politics. Buzzfeed has mapped many of the relationships
between businesses and people in what they have dubbed
[[https://www.buzzfeed.com/johntemplon/help-us-map-trumpworld][Trumpworld]].
They provided the data to enable citizens data science into the
wheelings and dealings of Donald J. Trump. The
[[https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1Z5Vo5pbvxKJ5XpfALZXvCzW26Cl4we3OaN73K9Ae5Ss/edit][raw
data set]] consists of three subsets of connections between:

- Organisations
- People
- People and organisations

This article presents a quick analysis of the data using the R language
for statistical computing and the iGraph package for analysing networks.
View download this code and associated files from
[[https://github.com/pprevos/r.prevos.net/tree/master/Miscellaneous/TrumpWorld][GitHub]].

** Trumpworld Analysis
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: trumpworld-analysis
   :END:

This article analyses the connections between organisations using the
mighty [[http://igraph.org/r/][igraph package]].The package implements
social network analysis for the R language which can be used for many
purposes, such as analysing
[[https://lucidmanager.org/analyse-enron-corpus/][email traffic]] or
[[https://lucidmanager.org/pacific-island-hopping/][flight paths]].

The code snippet below reads the data and converts it to a graph that
can be examined using social network analysis techniques. I have saved
the raw data available on Google Sheets file as CSV files. This data is
filtered to contain only ownership relationships and the names of the
organisations.

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
  library(tidyverse)
  library(igraph)
  trumpworld.org <- read_csv("TrumpWorld Data org-org.csv") %>%
      filter(Connection == "Ownership") %>%
      select(OrgA = "Organization A", OrgB = "Organization B")

  org.ownership <- trumpworld.org %>%
      as.matrix %>%
      graph.edgelist()

  par(mar=rep(0,4))
  plot(org.ownership,
  layout = layout.fruchterman.reingold,
      vertex.label = NA,
      vertex.size = 2,
      edge.arrow.size = .1
  )
#+END_EXAMPLE

#+CAPTION: Trumpworld Analysis: Ownership Relations in his Business
Network
[[/images/blogs.dir/4/files/sites/4/2017/01/trumpworld-org1.png]]

** Network Analysis
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: network-analysis
   :END:

This network contains 309 ownership relationships between 322 distinct
organisations. When we plot the data, we see that most connections are
dyadic connections between two firms. The plot is organised with the
[[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Force-directed_graph_drawing][Fruchterman-Reingold]]
algorithm to improve its clarity. We can also see a large cluster in the
centre. The names have been removed for clarity. Our excursion into
Trumpland continues by zooming in on the subnetwork. The second code
section excises this connected subnetwork so we can analyse it in more
detail.

** Digging Deeper
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: digging-deeper
   :END:

The node with the highest
[[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Degree_(graph_theory)][degree]] identifies
the business with the most holdings. This analysis shows that DJT
Holdings LLC owns 33 other organisations. These organisations hold other
organisations. We can now use the cluster function to investigate this
subnetwork using the decompose function, which splits the network into
its unconnected subnetworks. The code then selects and visualises the
largest of the subnetworks.

This Trumpworld analysis shows that the ownership network is a
[[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Star_(graph_theory)][star network]]. DJT
Holdings LLC centrally controls all organisations. Perhaps this graph
visualises the management style of the soon to be president Trump. Trump
centrally controls his empire, which is typical of a family business.
Does this chart visualise Trump's leadership style? Is the star network
an expression of his lack of trust and thus desire to oversee everything
directly?

#+BEGIN_EXAMPLE
  which.max(degree(org.ownership))

  org.ownership.d <- decompose(org.ownership)

  largest <- which.max(sapply(org.ownership.d, diameter))

  plot(org.ownership.d[[largest]],
       layout=layout.fruchterman.reingold,
       vertex.label.cex = .5,
       vertex.size = 5,
      edge.arrow.size = .1
  )
#+END_EXAMPLE

#+CAPTION: Trumpworld holdings subset. Click to zoom.
[[/images/blogs.dir/4/files/sites/4/2017/01/TrumplandHoldings-1024x897.png]]
