#+title: Defining a Water Quality Index to Communicate System Performance
#+date: 2014-02-01 11:00:00
#+lastmod: 2020-07-18
#+categories[]: The-Devil-is-in-the-Data
#+tags[]: Hydroinformatics R-Language Water-Quality
#+draft: true

Reporting water quality performance to senior management or customers
can be problematic as it requires a myriad of numbers and trying to
pronounce parameters---impossible words such as clostridium perfringens,
polydiallyldimethylammonium or bromochloroacetonitrile are not part of
the vocabulary of most people. These terms appear in the
[[https://nhmrc.gov.au/about-us/publications/australian-drinking-water-guidelines][Australian
Drinking Water Guidelines]] (2011). Directors and customers of utilities
are generally not water quality specialists and that need to be provided
with easy to digest information for them to be able to assess how
drinking water supply systems perform. A water quality index is
currently in development to achieve this goal.

The index is aimed at reducing complex data matrices to a single number,
combining information from various sources. The index provides an
overview of water quality performance, without mentioning technical
details. The overall index consists of five parameters: treatment
effectiveness, network protection, regulatory compliance and customer
perception.

Given the broad nature of these parameters---from subjective assessments
by customers to objective laboratory data---a certain level of
subjectivity is unavoidable. The different aspects of the index will not
contribute equally to the overall performance of water supply: How
should we view customer complaints about laboratory data?

** Methodology
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: methodology
   :END:

A crowd-sourcing tactic was employed in the form of a survey to seek the
collective opinion of water quality experts. A total of 36 responses
were received from Australia, New Zealand, the USA and Europe. The
survey was closed on 31 January 2014.

Respondents were asked about their involvement in water quality (such as
level of education and amount of experience in the field). The primary
survey consisted of two question banks regarding the relative importance
of each of the proposed index factors and network sub-factors. Data was
analysed using the using statistical package /R/. Responses can be
considered reliable as the average standard error is less than 5%. The
complete survey results and detailed analysis can be viewed on
[[http://rpubs.com/pprevos/wqindex][Rpubs]]. The raw scores on the main
questions are presented in the diagrams below. The levels on the Y-axis
are the relative importance (0--100) given to each of the parameters by
respondents.

#+CAPTION: Water Quality Index survey results (n=36).
[[http://lucidmanager.org/wp-content/blogs.dir/4/files/sites/4/2014/02/wqindex-1024x768.png]]

** Water Quality Index Analysis
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: water-quality-index-analysis
   :END:

The individual results regarding the relative importance of the
different factors and sub-factors are self-explanatory. These survey
results will weight the final index scores. Additionally, some
meta-analysis has been undertaken to obtain insight into the
complexities of assessing water quality performance. Factor analysis
with varimax rotation revealed that a one-factor solution is capable of
explaining 49% of the variance. This is an indication that questions
were answered consistently among respondents and that item scores can be
interpreted as originating from one
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Latent_variable][latent variable]], i.e.
water quality performance.

Ten respondents also provided additional comments regarding the water
quality index. Some respondents mentioned that the questions were
“simplistic”, “ambiguous“ and “inaccurate”. This problem is, however,
inherent to the data reduction and simplicity objectives of the water
quality index. The index's ambiguity and inaccuracy are a reflection of
the fact that information is sourced from paradigmatically different
sources such as customer feedback and laboratory results.

Due to the reduction in data complexity, the index, its factors and
sub-factors cannot be used for quantitative analysis. The index is, in
essence, a qualitative expression of water quality performance only
suitable for communication and not for analysis.

One respondent also commented on the relationship between physical and
biological water quality parameters and customer's perception of these:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
  Focus on water safety sometimes gets clouded by issues associated with
  customer aesthetic opinion.
#+END_QUOTE

This statement is an expression of the
[[https://lucidmanager.org/safe-water-versus-good-water/][water quality
paradox]]. Even if the quality of the water meets regulations, customers
might still not be satisfied. Providing safe water is a
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Necessity_and_sufficiency][necessary
condition, but not a sufficient condition]] to achieve customer
satisfaction.

** Conclusion
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: conclusion
   :END:

The survey has been successful and will aid in completing a water
quality index that reflects the relative importance of the different
aspects of water quality. The comments made by water quality experts are
a typical expression of the difference in thought worlds between
[[https://lucidmanager.org/engineering-marketing-interface/][scientists
and customer service professionals]] and aid in further developing a
theoretical model for organisational culture in water utilities.

#+CAPTION: *LEARN MORE ABOUT R FOR WATER PROFESSIONALS HERE!*
[[/images/blogs.dir/9/files/sites/9/2019/11/9-1024x512.png]]
